of china's booming east coast
[Music]
it's a massive port town a thriving
business centre
a magnet for foreigners and home to some
23 million people
if you were going to build a city to
promote the drug trade in china
it'd probably look like shanghai
this metropolis is an affluence factory
to the point where it's mocked by the
rest of china for having such a
superficial and greedy outlook
but when it comes to drug taking many
analysts think a much
more important factor than disposable
income
is a newfound social acceptance of drugs
and not only here
there was a time not so long ago when it
was hard to find a young person in china
who'd taken illegal drugs
their friends would have thought they
were freaks but in many circles now
it's seen as a totally normal and
acceptable practice
we meet a shanghai woman who at one time
got into methamphetamine
and why not her feelings were great she
was with her friends
and having the time of her life
[Music]
foreign
it's friday night in shanghai so
naturally the kids are heading out to
play
it was probably inevitable that as china
opened up to all things
foreign illegal drugs would eventually
spread through cities like this in
larger numbers
because this is a country that doesn't
know how to do things in
half measures when you're into it you're
into it
[Applause]
[Music]
what's more chinese people are early
adapters
according to police research the new
trend is to order drugs
over the internet some dealers even use
official fast couriers to make a drop
[Music]
compared to sydney london or new york
the level of drug use in places like
this
is still pretty small important thing
is the trajectory and it's only going in
one direction
and according to some experts while
economic growth may have fanned
chinese drug use a really big expansion
might be in the wings
if the economy actually falters
[Music]
foreign
that's not just because some might turn
to drugs when times are tough to dull
the pain
it's also because people might see the
narcotics trade
as a potential replacement for lost
business opportunities in
other areas
[Music]
yet as with all highs there's the come
down
our woman hit rock bottom when her son
who was once a good
student was nearly thrown out of school
[Music]
she was picked up by police and sent to
rehab
these days she's clean has a new job and
her son has made it into university
yet the old times still linger in her
[Music]
memory
[Applause]
[Music]
for many in china trying to kick it is
not only tough
but it's compulsory
and while ice may be on the rise a much
more traditional drug
casts a long shadow here
there are 1 000 ex-heroine addicts
working at the ulu complex
[Music]
work camp style rehabilitation centers
like this one
in yunnan's kaiowan city were set up in
the 1990s for drug users who'd been
picked up by the authorities
and today there are 678 of them across
china housing 300 000 ex-drug users
[Music]
but now the police who run nulu say
people
choose to come and choose to stay
but when they're here the rules are
strict
normally if a foreign camera crew came
into a chinese factory
there'd be smiles and giggling what are
they doing in here
not in this place listen nothing
just the sound of the machines people
are head down working
i don't know if it's because they're sad
or embarrassed about their past
but it's definitely the way it is
says it was only possible for him to
give up heroin because of the discipline
here
now he's been promoted to manage this
floor of the factory complex
oh
he introduces the work they do with 15
companies
investing in a network of factories
making everything from purses to solar
water heaters
door frames to cigarette lighters
i ask him what's become of the friends
he used to take heroine with
us
[Music]
has found a woman to marry him at the
factory but as for those who are once
closest to him
well he doesn't see them very much
[Music]
foreign
[Applause]
[Music]
this rehabilitation complex is rolling
out a massive attempt at healing
in response to an industrial sized
problem in china
yet if you think this is a concern but
it could even hit you
closer to home
[Music]
i just can't take my eyes i just can't
take my eyes i
just can't take my eyes off of you
it's the way that i feel when i'm
looking at you
doing the things that you do
mad i'm mad you're mad
[Music]
we're all mad good evening
and welcome to news at six last thing i
need right now is to get involved with a
married woman
i've got my reputation to think of what
do you know about what i want to achieve
let's just pretend that we live in the
real world where else would you rather
be
it's jack
[Music]
take my jack i just can't take my eyes
specs returns for a special episode
celebrating music of the 2010s
guests include kate miller heike vance
joy claire hooper and luke mcgregor
see you very soon australia the specs
and specs 2010 special
on abc and eye view it's been a year
like no other unprecedented unimaginable
unfathomable there's only one way to
look back on the year that was
20 bloody
this week on news breakfast wonder woman
herself gal gadot will tell us about her
latest installment of the superhero
franchise
and tis the season for scams
unfortunately but
we'll tell you how to spot them so you
don't end up falling for a christmas
fraud
see you then watch
abc news live stream anywhere anytime
on abc iview keep up to date with the
latest breaking stories from around the
corner
and across the globe and you can catch
up on all your favorite abc news and
current affairs programs
head to abc eye view and live stream abc
news now
today the united states gets the all
clear to begin
vaccinating against coronavirus
we have delivered a safe and effective
vaccine in just
nine months this is one of the greatest
scientific
accomplishments in history
[Music]
also had a severe weather warning in
place for parts of new south wales and
queensland residents told to brace for
possible flash flooding
victoria records its first covert cases
in hotel quarantine since the program
was overhauled
and an australian mathematician
recognised for helping crack a cryptic
message written by the zodiac serial
killer
hello and welcome to abc news i'm miriam
korowa
starting with breaking news justine the
u.s health regulator has approved the
country's first covida vaccine
the food and drug administration has
authorized the use of the fires of ion
tech vaccine
with the first inoculations expected
within days it marks a significant
turning point in the united states
where the pandemic has killed almost
three hundred thousand people
on behalf of the american people i'd
like to thank all of the brilliant
scientists
technicians doctors and workers who made
this all possible
fisa and moderna have announced their
vaccine is approximately 95
effective far exceeding expectations
these vaccines are also very safe
american citizens participated in
clinical trials that were
far larger than normal and had no
serious side effects
the dedicated and independent experts at
the fda meticulously studied the results
of the trials
and it has now passed the gold standard
of safety and i'm proud to say that we
have made sure that this vaccine will be
free for all americans
through our partnership with fedex and
ups we have already begun shipping the
vaccine to every state and zip code in
the country
the first vaccine will be administered
in less than 24 hours
the governors decide where the vaccines
will go in their state
and who will get them first we want our
senior citizens health care workers and
first responders to be first in line
this will quickly and dramatically
reduce deaths and hospitalizations
we are deeply grateful to every person
who has worked round the clock on this
monumental national project to save
lives
thank you all for your tremendous gifts
to humanity
god bless you god bless the united
states of america
and god bless the world back home
significant rain is forecast for
southeast queensland and northern
new south wales with the worst of the
conditions expected tomorrow
the new south wales mid north coast and
northern rivers areas received heavy
rain overnight
with 150 millimeters recorded in koff's
harbour
karen thomas reports from port macquarie
on the new south wales mid-north coast
well there's been some big rainfall
totals across the mid-north coast and
northern rivers of new south wales
in the last 24 hours or so in the
bellinger catchment to the south west
koff's harbour there's been falls of up
to 160 millimeters
now that catchment is now under a minor
flood warning from the bureau
of meteorology and the river is expected
to make reach the minor flood level at
around
six o'clock tonight the new south wales
state emergency service is warning
residents that that means they could
become isolated as bridges close
and low-lying farmland could also be
inundated
now there's more rain expected over the
coming days and the bureau's warning of
the possibility of moderate to major
flooding for that area into monday
and tuesday next week now that flood
warning for the bellinger catchment
is the only one at the moment but
catchments from
port macquarie right up to the tweed
remain
on a flood watch with those living or
working
along rivers in those areas urged to
monitor conditions it's kind of an
early warning that something could
eventuate there
the bureau is predicting for the rest of
today heavy rain
damaging winds abnormally high tides and
damaging surf
into this afternoon and the ses is
asking people to stay home
if it's safe and only head out if they
need to
there is a lot of rain that we've seen
recent in the last 24 hours and a lot to
come
um our ses units on the ground are
proactively working with their local
communities to make sure they're aware
of the
aware of the the risks and we're really
urging
communities to to stay vigilant keep an
eye and an area out on your local
weather forecast and heed any advice
that you may be given
now the ses is also warning people
visiting these areas or traveling
through
to stay up to date with the warnings and
keep themselves informed
of what's happening most state and
territory borders in australia
are open again with travelers from south
australia now allowed back
into queensland some jurisdictions
require pre-registration for entry mask
wearing
and venue check-ins while others are
more relaxed
the only domestic hard border that
remains is between western australia and
south australia and from today
new zealanders are also welcome in
queensland
victoria has recorded its first
confirmed coveted cases in international
travellers since the revamped hotel
quarantine program
resumed this week five cases have been
detected in quarantine
but for a 43rd day in a row there are no
new locally acquired cases
these results are from more than 8 700
tests
detecting positive cases actually
demonstrates that the system is working
and it's doing what it's supposed to do
and while obviously we'd all prefer that
there were no active cases
we're confident that the changes made to
strengthen the program
will ensure that we manage this in a way
that keeps return travelers
the workers caring for them and the
victorian community as safe as possible
the prime minister scott morrison has
told a forum of pacific island leaders
australia is committed to achieving net
zero emissions
as soon as possible he's told the
virtual meeting he's confident australia
will be able to meet paris agreement
emissions targets
without using carryover credits
australia has promised to cut
its 2005 emissions levels by up to 28
before 2030 global emissions reductions
we know are essential for our blue
pacific
our commitment to the paris agreement
has never wavered we've made it
we're reducing emissions through
practical clean energy technology
australia is very confident that we will
now achieve our 2030
target without the need to draw on our
carryover credits
that australians earned from
overachieving on our kyoto era
commitments
pressure is building on the coalition to
set a clear time frame for the target
with australia excluded from the list of
speakers at a un-led climate summit this
weekend
opposition climate change spokesman mark
butler has accused the prime minister of
being out of step globally
on emissions reductions last night at
the pacific islands forum
he expected some sort of award or
commendation
for giving a heavily qualified
suggestion that he might not after all
try to cheat the system by using kyoto
carryover credits
scott morrison's attempt this week to
pivot on climate change
has been shown to be all spin and no
substance and the rest of the world
is seeing right through that spin his
pig-headed refusal
to refuse to commit to net zero
emissions will see australia continue to
be isolated globally
and will come at a huge cost to
australians in lost jobs
and lost investment the u.s supreme
court has dismissed president donald
trump's bid to overturn the election
a lawsuit filed by texas's attorney
general
sought to throw out voting results in
four pivotal states
the justices refused to let texas file
the lawsuit
challenging joe biden's wins in
pennsylvania georgia michigan
and wisconsin the order clears those
states to cast their votes for mr
biden in the electoral college next week
staying in the u.s a car has crashed
into a crowd of protesters in new york
city
multiple people appear to have sustained
non-life-threatening injuries it's
unclear how many people
have been taken to hospital
the uk looks set to leave the eu without
a trade deal in just under three weeks
time while brexit officially took place
in january
the uk remains part of the eu single
market
and customs union but as the transition
period comes to an end
talks have reached an impasse with both
sides unable to agree on arrangements to
cover more than one trillion dollars
in annual trade the argument today
is about the terms on which
we trade with the european union and the
issue at the moment
is that they want the talks in brussels
are
uh stymied dead lodged because they want
to keep us
locked into a a system by which every
time
they change their laws we have to change
ours we don't think that's a brilliant
idea
[Music]
[Applause]
queensland has today opened up to south
australia just in time for the holiday
period
only the west australian south
australian border remains closed the
hard-hit tourism industry is hoping
australians get out
and enjoy parts of the country that have
been off limits due to the water
closures
if you are within one to five hours of
the city you're doing pretty acid any
city you're doing pretty well right now
i was on the south coast this week and
they are booked out until the end of
january and that's great news but that
is
that is definitely not the case
everywhere so um
destinations that are heavily reliant on
international tourism destinations that
um that are a flight away are we still
really struggling and we still have a
job to do
to help those businesses recover
domestic tourism makes up about two
two thirds of the visitor economy so it
is really important
um and it will help those businesses
recover
the only issue is that australians do
travel slightly differently to
international tourists and what we're
asking them to do is maybe travel a
little bit differently this year rather
than just going and
flying and flopping on a beach maybe get
out and do a local experience do a
walking tour
or do a surfing lesson and that is going
to help incredibly because
that those are the things those are the
operators that are really missing the
international tourist at the moment
the whole holiday here this year
campaign is really around encouraging
people
to holiday at home and maybe spend their
discretionary dollars
on a holiday which is really important
for their recovery
um and so what we're doing with this
this set next iteration
is saying that um you know a great way
to recover is to get out
and maybe give the gift of travel this
year rather than giving somebody socks
give them a surfing lesson or rather
than giving them a wallet give them a
walking tour
because we know that from the months and
months of lockdown and being physically
distanced people want to get out they
want to get together they want to
they want to meet with their loved ones
and what better way to do that
than on a holiday and helping in
industry recovery it's a bit of a mutual
benefit
a melbourne mathematician and two fellow
cryptologists have been officially
recognised by the fbi
for solving a 50 year old cryptic
message written
by the zodiac serial killer at least
five people were killed in the us by the
zodiac killer in the 1960s
but the killer's identity remains
unknown dr samuel blake is that
mathematician i spoke with him a little
earlier
we tried several hundred thousand
incorrect ways of solving the cipher
and just by chance we happen to
sort of stumble upon a fragment of how
it could be solved
and using that fragment we reverse
engineered the the entire solution
and uh got the the entire message out
from the zodiac
so what was that all important message
that took so much work to find
so i mean i'm not i'm not an expert on
on what the zodiac had to say i i
managed to help to to get that message
out
um it doesn't reveal his identity
doesn't give a lot of clues
to his identity i think more what it
does
is the the method that he was able to
use to create that
uh that cipher may help
uh track down who he is and when you say
we obviously you weren't alone
in this process you worked with at least
two other people
at this point of because it's more than
50 years
since that message was first published
so just take us through
how you work together and who was
involved with
with doing this yeah so
david ranchack is from the united states
and he has been working on trying to
solve this cipher in his spare time for
15 years
uh which is a herculean effort i
i saw some of the videos that he put
online promoting
analysis that he'd done of this cipher
and i thought they were excellent and so
i reached out to him in
i think about march of this year and it
was sort of a way of
getting through the the melbourne covert
lockdown uh was to to play around with
this in my spare time
amazing and was there any special
technology that
helped to finally i mean you talked
about reverse engineering
when you finally found a couple of
pieces of the puzzle
yeah so uh what you can see on the
screen now is a program called a z
decrypt which is written by
a guy from belgium called yale van ike
and
that was a central piece of technology
that we used
and then i used the spartan
supercomputer at melbourne university
um to run some of our candidate uh
reading directions through the cipher in
order to work out which was the right
direction to look through the cypher and
so it was a it was a large problem of
trial and error
and um with this i mean what was it that
made the code
so difficult to break
it was a combination of two things so uh
it was a homophonic substitution cipher
so
uh letters in the uh the text that the
zodiac was encrypting
is replaced with multiple symbols but
then
the the reading direction that we're
normally used to is you know left to
right
top to bottom on a page whereas what the
zodiac did in this in this cipher was to
to write it out down the diagonals of
the
of the page so he went uh
one one row down two columns across one
row down two columns across
in order to write it out and trying to
stumble across that correct
enumeration was uh was one of the main
difficulties here
and as you point out this is just a step
towards hopefully solving the case
it's still an active case so so how do
you feel about being involved
in something like this and are you
working on any further clues which might
help people finally
solve the identity yeah i think the
chances that we were going to be
at all involved in this were so small
because the chances of solving this
after 50 years was
next to next to zero and so being able
to play a role in this
is fantastic um you know i hope
this decryption may lead to uh
you know better narrowing down who this
person is um
but i guess we'll have to wait and see
in regards to
the other two ciphers that he sent we're
we're looking at those to see if there's
ways in which we can
we can use the work that we've done on
the
340 cipher to to solve those but none of
that is clear at this stage
mathematician samuel blake there from
the black lives matter movement to
traditional aboriginal songlines
one new group of young people is taking
on the issues that matter to them
dem mob from the ap white lands in far
northern south australia are using
rap to share their stories
from the apy lands to centre stage this
is demob they're teenagers from pokeja
community in the far north of south
australia who want to share their
stories with the rest of the country
people out there really don't know what
to go through the struggles we go
through
here and the experiences like they just
think we have easy lives but
if you come out here it's hard they sing
about black lives matter personal
ambition
their country and their culture all in
their first language
which they say has been a challenging
process
it's a very it's a language that's just
completely flat all the time it's like
the melody never changes that much so
i'm asking making the music and putting
it into something
our own being the first ones are doing
is pretty scary our language
can be unlocked to a new thing like
rapping
they only formed at the start of the
year and already demob has started
making a name for themselves
they've played at two adelaide festivals
and once in alice springs
but back home of course they also have
plenty of fans
the community are enjoying their songs
we've got the kids seeing them at school
as well like
kids are looking up to them we've got
fellas at school now who
as little as only like a couple months
ago i've now started rapping in language
in the classroom as well we want to
share everything but we can't do that
we're just like inviting people into the
lands because we can do it to our music
and give them a
quite quick big insight on our world the
truth is our dream and a dream is
freedom
manager
keeping language alive by taking it to
new places
samantha johnson abc news pokeja
before finding fame tasmanian author
kyle perry wrote one book
every year for 10 years and with his
debut published novel the bluffs finally
bringing him success perry is being
contracted to write another three books
he says he's writing draws not only on
the tasmanian landscape but also on his
work as a drug and alcohol
rehabilitation counsellor
my name is kyle perry and i'm 29 years
old and i'm from ridgely in the
northwest of tasmania
and i'm an author and i am a drug and
alcohol counselor
when i'm writing i am happiest when i'm
writing
i lose sense of myself there's no real
disconnect between
what's going on here and what's going on
here and that's
that's addictive to me it's healthy for
me it lights me up
writing writing's my favorite thing in
the whole world
and that's what draws me there every
every day
in grade six i sent an email to an
author that i really admired
and said i want to be a writer one day
that's all i want to do
and she replied and she said i think you
can do it
and um i never forgot that i never
forgot that and so i
i held on to that after that i just been
going after it hard hard finally
after book 11 the 11th manuscript
uh i got published i got an offer from
penguin random house
and that email i'll never forget it it
started off with
just a quick note before the week ends
to let you know that i have devoured
the utterly brilliant and insanely
compelling novel of kyle ferries
it had me up until 2 a.m i am completely
addicted
what a story what a talent that was the
start of the email
and the emotion that rushed through me i
can't
i can't describe the bluffs is centered
on the disappearance of a group of
teenage girls from a school excursion up
in the great western tears
the landscape is a character itself the
great western tears
as a location has incredible majesty
lawlessness mystery and that comes
through the page just because
that's inside of me that's inside of me
already because i grew up in the country
i'm a tasmanian the bush is it's in my
bones it's in my blood
the bluffs would not have existed
without my clients
i don't tell them this but
because nearly everything in the bluffs
is based on something that's really
happened
either not to myself but stuff that's
happened to my clients
like i've had to tone stuff down because
truth is stranger than fiction
qualification is in counselling and
coaching
uh and so at the moment i'm working in a
in a drug and alcohol program you know
i'm in a rehab
i see the triumphs i see the torture i
see the struggles and i just get this
amazing
chance to help them through it and
there's nothing
there's nothing better we're catching up
here with a guy today ryan
i i call him my little brother um he's
an absolute menace
he causes me sleepless nights still but
um
he's killing it and he he's someone who
fell through the cracks
got it bro yeah that's good i met kyle
for a rehabilitation program
uh you know at that time i was quite
lost and um
i was in a cycle of drug addiction and
when i met him
he had this presence about him and
helped me through a lot of struggles in
my life he was just very invested in me
and really wanted to help me to find
freedom
which i really thought wasn't possible
i've been clean now for three years um
and
definitely uh cole has been a big impact
to that i'm a counselor to my bones like
i'm a rider to my bones i'm a counselor
to my bones
my life has changed forever for the best
i am
i'm the happiest person in tasmania i'm
the happiest person in tasmania
and i can't wait for the future
time now for sport with jarrod coote
[Music]
australia's cricket selectors have been
presented with another headache
australian
test hopeful cameron green is in doubt
for next week's opening
match against india after a concussion
scared during australia a's tour match
against india at the scg
the young west australian was bowling to
indian talented jasper
bumra when he was struck in the face the
all-arounder was able to walk
off the field but was substituted and
taken from the ground for
treatment australia was dismissed for
108 in the first innings on the opening
day
finishing 86 runs behind the tourist
total of 194.
the melbourne stars eased to victory in
their big bash league opener overnights
the stars were too strong for the
brisbane heat winning by six wickets in
canberra sending to bat the heat would
dismiss for just 125 in the 20th over
with nathan cultsenaul starring with
four wickets
the stars chased down the target with
more than two overs to spare with
skipper glenn maxwell top scoring with
46 runs of just
26 balls melbourne has no time to
celebrate they'll take on the sydney
thunder this afternoon
and practices wrapped up at the abu
dhabi grand prix valtteri bottas was the
fastest in the final practice session
of the day bottas finished just ahead of
his mercedes teammate lewis hamilton who
is returning to the track
after contracting coronavirus max
verstappen was third fastest
with australia's daniel ricardo coming
in ninth kimi raikkonen
walked away unharmed after his engine
caught on fire late
in the session earlier in the day
michael schumacher's
son mick schumacher took part in his
maiden formula one session coming in
18th fastest
for hus west ham have fought back
from a goal down to defeat leeds united
2-1 in the premier league
this morning the hammers gave away an
early penalty just six minutes into the
match the visitors saved
the initial spot kick but the goalkeeper
didn't have a foot on the goal line so
leads
were awarded a second attempt which they
eventually converted now west ham
quickly levelled the score
from there through thomas socheck angelo
ogbonna
then scored the winner in the 80th
minute to move west ham up to
fifth on the ladder and there was no
surprises in the wnbl last night the
townsville fire boosted its finals hopes
with a 95-66 victory
over the adelaide lightning lauren
nicholson top scored for the fine with
21 points
as they maintained fourth spots while
the lightning remain in fifth
three wins behind the melbourne boomers
remain on track for a top two spot after
they down the winless bendigo spirit
91-70
stella beck starred with 17 points as
the boomers kept in contact
with the southside flyers and the
canberra capitals on the ladder
australian boxing's rising star brock
jarvis asserted his dominance last night
with an impressive fifth round knockout
victory
over mark schliebes in canberra jarvis
who is trained by hall of famer jeff
fennick is undefeated after 18
fights the 23 year old poured on the
punches from close range and kept leaves
against the ropes for the majority of
the fight
the victory saw jarvis claim the ibf pan
pacific and wbo global featherweight
belts
[Music]
on the satellite image a low pressure
system over central wa is causing strong
winds heavy rain and storms multiple
troughs are triggering rain and storms
in other parts of wa the nt
queensland northeastern new south wales
and western south australia
a high is keeping western new south
wales victoria and tasmania mostly dry
looking around the country for today
showers across queensland a hot day for
the state's east
even hotter in the west for new south
wales in the act
showers in the east mostly sunny clear
day for the state's west
windy on the alps sunny warm day for
most of victoria cloudy in the northwest
a warm day for southwestern tasmania
clearing fog in the southeast
and a cool sunny day for the north hot
but cloudy for southeast
and central south australia showers and
storms for the west windy and hot in the
north
a mostly sunny and warm day for southern
wa wind easing in the northwest a hot
day with showers and storms
in the state's northeast hot day for the
nt
showers and storms in the north west and
interior isolated showers and mild
conditions in the south
now to tomorrow's forecast for the
capitals heavy rain brisbane possible
showers for sydney and perth cloudy day
for canberra warm mostly sunny for
melbourne hobart and adelaide a possible
storm for darwin
that is the latest from abc news
remember you can keep up to date
at news.abc.net today you and on abc eye
view
i'm miriam coral with stay with us
landline summer
is up next
[Applause]
[Music]
know the story anytime anywhere with abc
news online
head to news.abc.net.u or download the
new abc news app
anywhere anytime a summer of
entertainment awaits
on abc eye view
[Music]
carried me to these places that i never
thought imaginable
[Applause]
together we can create a better future
so you're saying you're clean squeaky i
decided to stand up last night and i'll
continue to stand up
we're coming to you from the great
barrier reef which is like
it's in my dna put me in it
[Applause]
your summertime streaming is on abc eye
view
[Music]
hunger here we go intensity
action fascinating journeys
with legends of australian sport
streaming now on eye view
welcome to oneplus one i'm stan grant
starting monday
a life-changing moment i really lost
myself felt like a real failure and the
road to acceptance
sometimes you just need to ride the wave
how did you great question
she's been with me and allowed me to
find myself stan grant's one plus one
monday abc and iview dear humans
we need to talk there's pollution in my
air
and plastic in my oceans my trees and
animals are disappearing and my
temperature
is rising my climate is changing i think
i can fix it
but i can't fix it on my own small
changes can have a big
impact and right now we need to take
care of each other
signed your planet a season of stories
exploring our environment
your planet on abc
[Music]
on landline today taking a look at what
people with a disability
can achieve and the rewards of giving a
fair go
to those who often miss out on the
chance to work
hello i'm charles bryce a journalist
from abc adelaide
last thursday was international day for
the disabled
which aims to raise awareness about what
people with a disability can do
so landline invited me to present the
show today
when i was 19 i had a motorbike accident
on a farm
and i've been in a wheelchair ever since
last year with the support of friends
and family i embarked on a tough bike
ride to educate people
about spinal cord injuries landlines
prue adams joined me
i grew up in nariko in the states
southeast
my childhood sort of revolved around
sport
friends and also riding motorbikes and
flying airplanes i sort of knew from
quite a young age that
i'd always wanted to be a pilot there
was no plan b
for me it was just always i'm gonna be a
pilot
it was a really active childhood i found
it really hard to
sit still for any short period of time
which
is quite ironic now
i've known jock for as long as i can
remember we
went to kinney together and primary
school
base did all their kindergarten junior
sports
footy motorbikes i remember tearing up
his
mum and dad's front lawn at the naracoor
house which they weren't too happy about
it was a friendship that's it's always
been pretty strong
peruna is his tiny town in the south
australian mallee
in 2010 jock was running his family's
sheep and grain property there
we'll sort of leading up the seating i
don't need another another operator and
i knew charles would be up for it i
remember it
quite vividly i finished football
training on a tuesday night here in
adelaide and
when i got back to my car i saw i had a
missed call from jock yeah
and he asked if i wanted to move to the
family property
move up here and keep working so i think
within
a day or so he was up here ready to go i
instantly fell in love with it and
could see myself doing it for quite a
while but unfortunately i was only there
for about six weeks
looking back i'd still remember the day
as if it was yesterday
it was a pretty standard sort of
saturday morning while we were just
getting ready for
footy and a ride and woke up had
breakfast it was pretty laid back
there was about seven or eight of us and
that point of time was probably the only
time where i hadn't owned a motorbike so
i was the one to ride the farm bike
which
um you know it was a slower
heavier bike than what all the other
guys were riding
when we ride in those sort of groups
we'll always have a lead pack or
the fast riders be up the front and then
we'll eventually all stop
and meet i guess we weren't too far from
home and
i was coming around a bit of a slight
bend in the track and
there were a few few bumps and each bump
previously
getting bigger and i guess being a bit
of a heavier bike the
front wheel dug in and sent me flying
over the handlebars
basically got to the end of orange road
there and we stopped and
were waiting and waiting we couldn't
hear hear a bite coming
i went to roots for the phone in my
pocket and
um i couldn't move any part of my body
so
that's probably the sticking point where
i realised that i'm in a bit of trouble
i could see the motorbike laying not too
far from where i was and
i remember quite clearly just watching
the petrol drip from the bottom of the
engine i thought to myself
i can't move here so hopefully that the
bike doesn't go up in flames and
although i would save on commotion
phases not the way i would want to go
the paramedics arrived on the scene
shortly after
jock was in the back of the habits with
me i think i was
pretty chirpy at this stage with with
the medication
in the ambos i remember it sort of yeah
being a bit of a
joke sort of thing to be honest like
we're just yeah joking and
i know charles wanted to go to the
bakery before hospital and unfortunately
they didn't let me do that and took me
straight to hospital
in the nine and a half years since the
accident i've often thought i'd like to
meet the two ambulance officers who put
my neck in a brace
and rush me to hospital last week i did
charles i'm jen this is james
what did you guys think when you first
rocked up and what were
some of your first impressions i think
the main thing that sticks with us was
how calm you were you did keep saying
that you know you couldn't couldn't move
your arms couldn't move your legs
um yeah we could tell straight away it
was quite serious yeah
and yeah you kept saying how hungry you
were and yeah vegemite scroll the more
went the lights and sirens on yeah could
we go faster yeah
and so you had a good sense of humor as
well
so i broke my neck at the c5 and
c6 vertebrae essentially that's left me
with
no feeling or movement blow about my
armpits i think i was
just about to go into surgery and i
remember
one doctor saying you know you've you've
broken your neck you
essentially you'll never walk again
[Music]
that was probably you know the moment
where it all hit home and
i remember just bursting into tears and
[Music]
i guess there was probably a bit of
denial there as well and
i thought you know this can't happen to
me surely
not me i was 19 and invincible this
you know this happens to other people
not me
[Music]
it took a long time to rehabilitate but
these days i'm pretty self-sufficient
i live in my own in my house in adelaide
with some help in the mornings and at
night
life for me now is fantastic i've just
finished a journalism degree at uni and
just landed a job at the abc
as a digital reporter and producer
thank you look at this when you get a
chance this guy's been arrested over his
car
you know all the pieces are sort of
falling into place and
just almost seeing my life now as an
expensive hobby
[Music]
i'd never gone back to the accident site
and that was something
i thought i needed to do this is where i
ended up learning
i was looking for some motorbike broken
parts but this is as close as i've got
so i figure that's uh that's uh probably
some of you
that's where it went c5 perhaps it's uh
it was on the ground so i'm trying to
chuck it back here humor has been the
thing that's gotten us all through some
pretty dark times
what's a lot of you being back here
well i wasn't looking forward to it but
[Music]
close to three years i think
i felt guilty because i knew that we
wouldn't be doing it together and doing
those sort of things
but yeah i sort of wanted to break that
fear
for myself and move on
i wasn't going to stop it was something
that i guess you
probably almost needed to do to get back
on the horse and
live a normal life which he would have
been doing otherwise if
i hadn't fallen off on your bike
oh yeah hold on we don't blow it up in
mid-october
21 people join me on a property just
outside of perona
we'll get going as soon as possible but
just on behalf of sarah and i
just want to thank everyone for coming
out and joining us on this ride
my good friend from narrow court sarah
arnold and i had spent two years
planning a 300 kilometer road trip to
adelaide
when charles had his accident i knew
from the start that i wanted to do
something
i just wasn't sure what it started with
a walk that i was going to do for him
and he flipped it around and said i want
to be involved let's do it for everyone
i've said whatever you want me to do i
would do but i have not been involved
at all he's he's done it himself with
sarah
and i think that's uh yeah that's what
had to happen weather's
a little bit gloomy but i think we once
we get on the bikes and get moving it'll
be
good so the people on the trip uh
some of my closest friends and family
we're all doing it for
for one reason that's to to help raise
money and and find
uh a cure for spinal cord injuries so
we're gonna ride as one group to peruna
about 10ks and then
stop around there and then the fast
group will head off to the snack stop at
linton
and then this log grip will come up and
meet us there
[Music]
i'm an ambassador for the wings for life
foundation
and sarah and i have started our own
charity called wheel to walk
we've been sponsored by different
companies and schools
and want to raise funds for research
into spinal cord injuries
the first night gets us into loxton on
the murray river
at six am on day two we could be
spending up to
you know anywhere between six and eight
hours
on the road today part of me is feeling
as if it's
the last thing i want to be doing keep
pushing one of the major motivators for
this ride
is to raise awareness about the hidden
side effects of a spinal cord injury
not only am i unable to walk i can't
regulate my body temperature
and i only have 50 lung capacity
but what is most frightening is that i'm
at risk of stroke or death you're right
with that
or yeah a condition called autonomic
dysreflexia
can occur in people with damage high up
in the spinal cord
the resulting blood pressure spikes can
lead to headaches and blurred vision
but also strokes after seven hours in
the bike today we finally made it to
swan reach
we've covered 95 kilometers we've had
the persistent headwinds and then we've
had the
afternoon sun blurring down on us and
not being able to
regulate my body temperature or sweat
it's really taken a toll on my body so
pretty exhausted there's been times
where i've
uh and that breaking point my shoulders
are doing about 300 rotations every
kilometer
they're all that i have for moving so i
hope i'm not wearing them out
this morning and lacking a fair bit of
enthusiasm for the day and
i think all of a sudden it seems like
riding
300 kilometers is a pretty stupid idea
on day three the scenery has changed
from the dryness of the mallee
into the barossa day three is done we've
just run into tin under and set up camp
it took us about four hours to get from
swan rates two to under and
come to 75 kilometers of which
unfortunately i sat out for
for about 15 kilometers just due to the
sheer steepness of the road all right
you're right yeah i should be right
dude right we'll get you a crusty center
section and
keep going and then it's lunchtime
there's so much going on behind the
scenes
dad and jock have continued to help me
along the way
and sarah's mum julie is in charge of
feeding us all
every day yeah there is hair and then
there's dylan what a drape for the
ladies
yeah i guess what's keeping me going is
having 20 other girls around me and
encouraging me through you know if i was
out here by myself and you know i'm
probably
called for someone to come pick me up
and get in the van of shame
this has been the easiest day the last
few days has been quite challenging
and long and we can see the finishing
line in sight
there it is man after four long days we
are finally
heading into adelaide
[Music]
we had rain first day and last day and
had been pretty much the whole trip so
that we finally made it congratulations
yeah i'm
exhausted yeah it's pretty emotional
having everyone here
everyone that supported me just got me
through
raised more than our target of a hundred
thousand dollars
now sarah and i are talking about how we
can do this
all again a legend
absolute legend
people on the autism spectrum can
struggle to find work
but with agriculture crying out for more
workers
one organisation has made its workplace
more accessible for people with autism
and it's now reaping the rewards as
cassie huff reports
[Music]
all right so let's go into room eight
and centain if you can do all the
temperatures and
check this out yep can you go through
and do all the feeding yep
sure i think check this out as you go
and scrape out any feeders for us of
course
it's an early start for workers at this
piggery an hour north of adelaide
but when sentence smith walks into the
shed where the sounds give birth
she and her colleagues get quite the
welcome
so i'm picky runs from here i think the
pigs know me
by now hey hey and the response that i
get from them when i walk into the chat
especially when i feed them is
oh here comes the person that gives us
their feed
centene does a range of jobs on the farm
there you go
i think that wasn't too bad
[Music]
sometimes she does the feeding and at
other times is responsible for taking
the sounds temperatures
to ensure they don't have a fever that
could lead to problems such as mastitis
zentane didn't grow up on a farm
but she has always had an affinity with
animals there we go
the thing i like to do most with the
pigs is um
when i've piggybacked the people is to
have a little bit of hug with them and
talk to themselves and their pictures
and just you know let them know what's
happening because
especially when you've got their first
time mums it's
nice to reassure them that i'm not
hurting the baby
but finding a full-time job hasn't been
easy for her
centene has autism she's 30 years old
and despite an animal science degree
with honours
a certificate 3 in laboratory techniques
and a certificate 4 in library tech
she's been unable to find a full-time
job
until now
it was just frustrating playing with
jobs and saying oh you're getting
feedback from individual you did well
but
and not having feedback so
it was pretty not a very good process to
go through but
it's a common story for autistic people
mikhail crossfield also has the
condition
and has endured a lifetime of knockbacks
and disappointments
the hardest thing is that we're not very
vocal as such can show you how
we can do stuff but unfortunately
with the the normal way of doing
um job applications it's always
one-on-one
you show your resume and you're expected
to tell your experience
rather than showing it
so tell me more about what you're going
to do this afternoon
uh vaccinates the sales fee
only about 40 percent of autistic people
have a job but at sunpork's piggeries in
south australia and queensland
12 members of the staff are on the
autism spectrum
the push to employ autistic people came
from the company's managing director
robert van barnevelt rob's daughter was
diagnosed with the condition when she
was four
her diagnosis has since changed but it
led him to develop
close ties to the autism community
this is one of the first programs that's
involved agriculture
and it's one of the first programs that
that has involved
harnessing skills that you know might
involve an empathy with animals or
animal care
as opposed to numbers and pure i.t when
we're talking about people on the
spectrum
so from that point of view it is
absolutely a world first and
there's been a lot of uh things we've
had to learn through that journey south
australia yeah
the interesting thing with lizzy is she
put her mind to it and she's
finished high school last year whilst
working for us which i think is surreal
that's a big commitment she seems pretty
happy she's very happy yeah
the recruitment process has had to
become a lot more friendly though
and that's where kirsty richards came in
she's the autism and agriculture program
leader
it was her job to look at the
traditional recruitment techniques
such as resumes and interviews that some
autistic people struggle with
and find a way to make it suitable for
them
where we've certainly found autistic
people thrive is when they're given an
opportunity to show what they can do
and nowhere in the traditional
recruitment model is that
that that ability to actually get out
there and show your ability to do a job
rather than try and convince someone
that you can do their job
so what we we've done is removed
interviews and resumes entirely
and what we've done is give our
candidates
an opportunity to apply online using
photographs and we had some just
wonderful applications
interviews were replaced by two weeks on
the job training
originally the company wanted to employ
autistic workers in a specific role with
the south
but it soon became apparent there was no
one job
suited to all the applicants it's kind
of
turned the traditional recruitment model
from that perspective on its head
you're taking a person and finding the
best role for them rather
than sitting there with a role and
saying you must fit in this box
and it's not just about matching people
to roles it's also
matching people to people
david mclean is the production manager
at the worsleys piggery in south
australia
it's been his job to look after the five
autistic workers at the site
he admits initially the existing staff
were apprehensive
it was scary for them at first and
probably we could have done a little bit
better by a few more
what is autism type aspects of the
program
but generally the the people have taken
that on very well
and they've learned with myself going
going through the the program that we've
done over the last 18 months
if you look at what they have achieved
as a group
it has been exceptional it the workplace
has totally changed
the morale has changed their pride in
the business has changed incredibly
and and i can't get over what they have
achieved and without their commitment it
wouldn't have been
a success
sunpork is australia's largest
family-owned piggery
needle okay we'll take it off and one of
the secrets of success for the autism
and agriculture project has been the
mentor program
there have been a wide range of
responses we've had
some of the mentors of just you know
crusty old pig farmers who you would
never expect to take such uh ownership
of other staff members
in terms of educating them and making
sure they're okay
both in work and out of work uh you know
that's
that's been a tremendous transformation
it's funny they just came together like
a jigsaw you had an individual
autistic person who had certain skills
and you could
just say that they're really well
matched to this mentor
[Music]
for the autistic workers the project has
had flow-on benefits
far beyond the workplace
nick is in an acting group and centene
has bought a house
it's also changed the life of her mother
beth keisler
who rode the roller coaster ride of
highs and lows while zentane was
searching for a job
unless you've had a child with a
disability you can't
explain
how how it just weighs on you
that nobody sees this any value in her
and when she understands
that as well that is really hard
because you see the value in there but
no one else seems to
so you know the difference in her
confidence
level is just amazing and
i am just so i am going to get much
i am so thankful that somebody
has given her the chance to show
that she is um that she can contribute
you know that she has a lot to offer
get on top of these cows flights on then
you get the scrabbling behavior
many people with autism have shown an
empathy for animals
american consultant to the livestock
industry and autism spokesperson temple
grandin
is perhaps the most famous if they move
when you squeeze them you're hurting
them
a colleague of mine and i uh actually
met with her
and we talked about the objectives for
the program uh
and she was a tremendous help she she
gave us some very clear guidelines and
and kind of explained that some
candidates will be suited to the animal
roles and some just won't
but you need to understand their needs
and the environment they need to work in
and if you provide clear directions
clear expectations and constant
follow-up
then you're going to have a successful
pathway so that gave us a lot of
confidence to go forward the initial
pilot project received 150
000 from the south australian government
for external collaborators
but for kirsty and rob the benefits to
the businesses
culture far outweigh the costs i would
argue the program hasn't cost anything i
mean it's been
extremely valuable to the business and
when you have programs like this that
have such an impact on the overall
culture of the business the outputs far
exceed the inputs so
from sunpork's perspective we pay people
for a day's work we pay them the full
wage that's not subsidised
or anything like that our autistic
candidates are very much part of the
staff and they get
treated like everybody else our capacity
to innovate
has increased tremendously because we
have people who think differently and
they problem-solve differently and
so we can take a problem and look at it
totally differently to the way we did 12
months ago
and it hasn't cost us anything
and it's gained so much for the
individuals involved
for our greater workforce and for you
know for our rural communities in
general
every day we talk about diversity in the
workplace
this is true diversity this is
neurodiversity
we are looking for employees that can
think differently
we don't want to employ the same people
all the time and through that
we get benefits in the workplace so
it is anything but charity
in much of australian agriculture
particularly intensive farming like pig
production
finding and retaining staff is a
constant struggle
in the 18 months since the autism and
agriculture project started
there's been a 70 retention rate of the
autistic employees
so how's it going in the new house yeah
you got it all set up
yeah good morgan garden but yeah it'll
happen
that's right plenty of opportunity the
program has changed the lives of the new
staff members
and the existing ones and created some
lifelong friendships
but since being here it's been like it's
like a second fair
no yeah a second family
the journey's been very emotional and
you get very attached to the
uh the individuals and
they've taught me so much in the last 18
months and hopefully i have
taught them well kirsty now wants to see
other businesses embrace autism in their
workforce
our autistic people have not had to
change
we've just had to open our minds to the
to the benefits that they bring to our
workplace and they're just
so courageous and so brave and it's such
a privilege to be involved
in something that
gives so much back to people and to
families
and also to our business and to
workplaces
well it's made me feel like yes i can
actually do this despite the fact that
you have good asperger's you know
because it's
you know i can't mind tied to at the end
of the week but
i'm not tired because i've been signed
up late and i've been tired because i've
come to work and
actually achieved something through the
week
that's landline for today thanks for
your company
pip courtney will be back next week for
another program from our summer series
i'm charles bryce bye for now
[Music]
this week on news breakfast wonder woman
herself gal gadot will tell us about her
latest installment of the superhero
franchise
and tis the season for scams
unfortunately but
we'll tell you how to spot them so you
don't end up falling for a christmas
fraud
see you then
grandstand summer of cricket continues
live and ad free
as australia face off against fierce
rivals india taking the catch behind
every test all the rivalry called live
at the grounds
grandstand summer of cricket live on abc
radio
and the abc listen app spiks and specs
returns for a special episode
celebrating music of the 2010s
guests include kate miller heike vance
joy claire hooper and luke mcgregor
see you very soon australia the specs
and specs 2010 special on abc and iview
whenever you want wherever you are know
the story with abc news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world if the situation
deteriorates the hard border comes back
go to news.abc.net.edu or download the
news app
there really is a quite serious
situation that we're worried about
get the latest information and updates
from every region in one
place ses they're all urging people just
don't drive
head to the abc emergency website and
stay connected
today america's first kovit 19 vaccine
approved with
jabs coming by tomorrow we have
delivered a safe and effective vaccine
in just
nine months this is one of the greatest
scientific
accomplishments in history
[Music]
also ahead southern queensland and
northern new south wales brace for
potential flooding
more than a trillion dollars in trade on
the line as
brexit stalls once again
and a program bridging the gap between
indigenous youth and to the police in
wa's gold
fields
hello and welcome to abc news i'm miriam
corowa
the u.s health regulator has approved
the country's first covid vaccine
the food and drug administration has
authorized the use of the fires of iron
tech
vaccine with the first inoculations
expected within days it marks a
significant turning point in the united
states
where the pandemic has killed almost 3
hundred thousand people on behalf of the
american people i'd like to thank all of
the brilliant scientists
technicians doctors and workers who made
this all possible
fisa and moderna have announced their
vaccine is approximately 95
effective far exceeding expectations
these vaccines are also very safe
american citizens participated in
clinical trials that were far
larger than normal and had no serious
side effects
the dedicated and independent experts at
the fda meticulously studied the results
of the trials
and it has now passed the gold standard
of safety and i'm proud to say that we
have made sure that this vaccine will be
free for all americans
through our partnership with fedex and
ups we have already begun shipping the
vaccine to every state and zip code in
the country
the first vaccine will be administered
in less than 24 hours
the governors decide where the vaccines
will go in their state
and who will get them first we want our
senior citizens health care workers and
first responders
to be first in line this will quickly
and dramatically reduce
deaths and hospitalizations we are
deeply grateful to every person who has
worked round the clock on this
monumental national project to save
lives
thank you all for your tremendous gifts
to humanity
god bless you god bless the united
states of america
and god bless the world australia won't
be rushing to approve a coronavirus
vaccine despite the pfizer jab getting
emergency approval in the u.s
and the uk the acting chief medical
officer says we're still on track to
roll out a vaccine
next year we have pfizer as one of our
vaccines
that is on order to come to australia
next year and we'll be
indeed going through the reg the full
regulatory process through our own
world-class regulator the therapeutic
goods administration
so quite a different situation in the uk
in canada and now in the u.s
in terms of what's happening with the
pandemic and their need
their emergency in fact to have
vaccine available to the population and
starting with priority groups just as we
are planning to do so in australia
with that vaccine but just to stress
this is not full approval that the fda
is given
neither has the uk neither has canada
these are emergency
use authorizations to allow the vaccine
to roll out
um also overnight and this is part of
the reason why the fda is confident to
give that
uh that that authorization
uh the um in the new england journal of
medicine one of the
premier journals medical journals in the
world fisa has
has reported on their phase three trial
results their interim results
and it's very encouraging uh we've heard
some of the the headlines before but
there's more detail now than we've uh
we've heard before from the company
itself
it's peer-reviewed uh scientific
literature and that's how we move
forward with the scientific expertise so
effective effective in old people and
young people effective in healthy people
and people with chronic disease
and a very good safety profile so
these are interim results we'll get
we'll get more detail and and much more
detail will come to the therapeutic
goods administration
to allow them to make their their own
independent assessment of these of these
matters
and give us regulatory approval and that
confidence that we absolutely need
for any new vaccine that it is safe
and effective significant rain is
forecast for southeast queensland
and northern new south wales with the
worst of the conditions
expected tomorrow the new south wales
mid-north coast and northern rivers
areas received heavy rain overnight with
150 millimeters recorded in coughs
harbour
karen thomas has more from port
macquarie well there's been some big
rainfall totals across the mid north
coast and northern rivers of new south
wales
in the last 24 hours or so in the
bellinger catchment to the south west of
coffs harbour there's been falls of up
to 160 millimeters
now that catchment is now under a minor
flood warning from the bureau
of meteorology and the rivers expected
to make reach the minor flood level at
around six o'clock tonight
the new south wales state emergency
service is warning residents that that
means they could become isolated as
bridges close
and low-lying farmland could also be
inundated
now there's more rain expected over the
coming days and the bureau's warning of
the possibility of moderate to major
flooding for that area into monday and
tuesday next week
now that flood warning for the bellinger
catchment is the only one at the moment
but catchments from port macquarie right
up to the tweed remain
on a flood watch with those living or
working along rivers in those areas
urged to monitor conditions it's kind of
an early warning
that something could eventuate there the
bureau is predicting for the rest of
today
heavy rain damaging winds abnormally
high tides and damaging surf
into this afternoon and the ses is
asking people to stay home
if it's safe and only head out if they
need to
there is a lot of rain that we've seen
recent in the last 24 hours and a lot to
come
our ses units on the ground are
proactively working with their local
communities to make sure they're aware
of the
aware of the the risks and we're really
urging uh communities to uh
to stay vigilant um keep an eye and an
area out on your local
weather forecast and heed any advice
that you may be given
now the ses is also warning people
visiting these areas or traveling
through
to stay up to date with the warnings and
keep themselves informed
of what's happening most state and
territory borders in australia are open
again with travelers from south
australia now allowed back into
queensland
some jurisdictions require
pre-registration for entry
mask wearing and venue check-ins while
others are more relaxed
the only domestic hard border that
remains is between western australia and
south australia and
from today new zealanders are also
welcome in queensland
victoria has recorded its first
confirmed covert cases in international
travellers since the revamped hotel
quarantine program resumed
this week five cases were detected in
quarantine but for a 43rd day in a row
there have been no new locally acquired
cases
more than 8 700 people were tested
across the state
yesterday detecting positive cases
actually demonstrates that the system is
working and it's doing
what it's supposed to do and while
obviously we'd all prefer that there
were no active cases
we're confident that the changes made to
strengthen the program
will ensure that we manage this in a way
that keeps return
travelers the workers caring for them
and the victorian community as safe as
possible
the prime minister scott morrison has
told a virtual forum of pacific island
leaders australia is committed
to achieving net zero emissions as soon
as possible
he's told the virtual meeting he's
confident australia will be able to meet
paris agreement emissions targets
without using carryover credits
australia has promised to cut its 2005
emissions
levels by up to 28 before
2030 global emissions reductions
we know are essential for our butte blue
pacific
our commitment to the paris agreement
has never wavered we've made it
we're reducing emissions through
practical clean energy technology
australia is very confident that we will
now achieve our 2030
target without the need to draw on
our carryover credits that australians
earned
from overachieving on our kyoto era
commitments
the government is being warned it needs
to better prepare for a transition
to a green global economy or leave
thousands of people out of work
the warning comes as world leaders took
part in virtual talks on how to manage a
shift to green energy and address the
threat of climate change
jay rudevitz from the institute for
sustainable futures says the market for
our coal exports will shrink
it takes time to diversify an industry
and bring in new industries so
we need to start that planning now and
absolutely renewables will play a part
in it
and the new industries will be powered
by renewables
but it's not just that you can go right
we had coal
and we exported a lot of it and then we
can you know we'll have a lot of
renewables so
even though it's the same number it's
not going to employ all those people and
we really need to plan for this and do
it as a joint effort between
government the communities and indeed
the coal industry
this has been done in other places
germany has been pretty successful about
transitioning their
their coal areas the rural area um has
transitioned over i think it took about
20 years of planning implement you know
so it was a
a planned transition and and we have we
know that this is going to happen
so we need to be putting things in place
now we shouldn't
leave it until those jobs disappear we
need to start
planning for diversification and
bringing in
education where it's needed putting in
policies so that people
can retrain and do get compensated but
certainly
in germany they've done it without any
forced redundancies
now they did have an older workforce
than we have here in australia in the
coal industry
so that just means we have to put even
more effort into this
our targets for 2030 they they are
it's not that we're not going to meet
them but they they are
nowhere near what we need to do and what
we could do
and in fact the state targets are
i think without exception higher than
our national
target and and really what better time
is there than now to act we are coming
out of a pandemic
we need to create jobs so
we need to act on climate and truth you
know we are also really
marginal you know we are very at risk
from climate change as we saw last year
with the fires
and we also have renewable resources
frankly that are the envy of the world
so
what better time is there than this to
actually act and
it presents us both you know with
enormous opportunities and
frankly i i can't understand why we
aren't
taking more action and embracing both
the need and the opportunity
water supply for townsville in north
queensland is critically low after a
pipe failure
the pipe which ruptured yesterday
supplies the douglas
water treatment plant the broken section
has now been removed and work is
underway to fix it
residents of townsville and magnetic
island are being asked to only use water
for drinking and
flush the toilet until the work is
finished which is likely to take another
24 hours
[Music]
[Applause]
donald trump has been dealt a crushing
setback in his quest to undo his
election loss
to president-elect joe biden the u.s
supreme court has brought an abrupt
end to a lawsuit filed by texas seeking
to throw out voting results in four
pivotal states
the justices refused to let texas file
the lawsuit
challenging mr biden's wins in
pennsylvania georgia michigan
and wisconsin the order clears those
states to cast
their votes for mr piden in the
electoral college next week
uk and russian scientists are teaming up
to trial a combination of the
oxford astrazeneca and sputnik v
vaccines to see if protection against
covet-19 can be improved
astrazeneca is recruiting people aged 18
and over and will observe
whether the mixed jab will help boost
the immune response
the trials will be held in russia but
it's not clear how many people will
participate
both boris johnson and the president of
the european commission have spoken in
gloomy terms about the likelihood of a
post-brexit trade deal
the two leaders have agreed to make a
decision on the future of negotiations
by the end of the weekend
the irish and german foreign ministers
have struck a more optimistic note
saying a deal is still feasible it was a
coveted welcome for the prime minister
today had a firm providing energy for
the future
more immediate trade talks though must
be on his mind
negotiators are still working out which
way they'll go
as boris johnson warned again reaching
agreement with the eu
looks doubtful it's looking you know
very very likely that we'll have to go
for
a solution that i think would be you
know wonderful for the uk we'd be able
to do exactly what we want from
uh from january the first elvis it would
be uh
different from what we'd set out to
achieve but i've no doubt that this
country
can get ready and as i say come out on
world trade terms
so for those affected what does that
mean this farm exports bali to the eu
if there's no deal come january world
trade rules kick
in meaning tariffs or taxes on goods
moving between here and the continent
which could push costs up i think for
the
industry as a whole it'll be disastrous
we've got
a perfect storm approaching of the
support payments being taken away
brexit possibly no deal and covered 19
all these things have come all at once
and and that is a massive problem
there's already congestion at ports as
global supply chains struggle with
demand and covered restrictions
brexit will mean more change for
businesses whatever the outcome of trade
talks
the government says it is prepared but
no deal could mean more
disruption both sides say they want an
agreement but that may well
not happen because the same sticking
points remain
access to fishing waters and shared
regulations and standards
and on that number 10 says the uk has to
be able to make its
own decisions and not be tied to eu
rules
in future from brussels today the
message was
that's perfectly possible but there'd be
a price
they would remain free sovereign
if you wish to decide what they want to
do we would
simply adapt the conditions for access
to our market
accordingly the decision of the united
kingdom
and this would apply vice versa so
neither side shifting yet but the door
isn't entirely closed
we believe finding a solution in the
talks is difficult but
possible that's why we as the eu will
continue negotiations as long as the
windows open even if it's
only a crack negotiations are still
ongoing
and i think the implications are very
serious for all concerned in the event
of an ordeal
and i think all politicians in the
united kingdom and
across europe need to reflect on that so
in brussels the mood may be gloomy
but until sunday which is decision day
they
are still talking mark steers from the
university of sydney and a former chief
speech writer for the british labour
party says a no deal brexit is highly
likely
i mean it's not absolutely certain there
will be some
sort of really frenetic diplomacy going
on over the weekend and
uh on sunday evening in the uk and the
eu the negotiators will decide whether
there's any
light at the end of the tunnel still but
it's looking pretty bleak at the moment
chaos unfortunately is the most likely
outcome for
no deal and just two things to bear in
mind in particular
there's a huge argument about fisheries
going on about who can fish in the
waters around britain
today the british have announced that
there will be navy ships
uh in the channel to ensure that eu
fishing boats don't
go where they're not meant to go i mean
that's a really uh dangerous situation
as you can imagine the
chaos that might come if a navy ship
tries to block a
french trawler from fishing in british
waters um
and and also you know simply uh boats
coming in
with uh trucks with goods uh we've
already seen
trial runs in the uk in the county of
kent to see what it will be like if
you can't ship goods easily across from
france to the uk
and you're talking about you know
incredible traffic chaos i mean
tailbacks of tens of miles uh truck
drivers unable to move
um and at a time like this you know
especially in the middle of the
pandemic when people are trying to ship
important medicines and vaccines from
you know the eu to the uk that kind of
chaos will um you know be really poorly
received by everybody
i mean boris johnson's great political
strength is what the british call his
boosterism
you know he's able to make anything look
like a good thing it's going to be